It's not easy being raised by a famous father,
especially one that has been a primary
spiritual inspiration for this generation.
But, Don Miguel Ruiz Jr. has learned,
and continues to learn his father's lessons,
and is now teaching the Toltec way
with his brother, Don Jose Ruiz,
and his father.
In "The Four Agreements," "Mastery of Love,"
and "Voice of Knowledge,"
Don Miguel Ruiz Sr. shares the practice
of using life as art, as a blank canvas
that is only for you to use for your creation called life.
(soft music)
We were talking off camera,
and, you were saying that
it wasn't always easy for you,
you rebelled against the Toltec knowledge
when you were younger, as did your father.
Yes.
When his mother was trying to teach him.
Mhmm.
And grandpa.
And so, let's talk about that a little bit,
what was it that you were being taught,
that your being just fought against initially,
like your father?
Well, the rebellion really came,
more in the sense that,
you know, when
I had to describe to my friends what my family was,
and it was interesting because, you know,
going to a private school, and mostly Catholic,
it's kind of hard to describe that.
And, you can say the rebellion came,
was like, "Well I want to be part of the world,
"I want to be excepted by my peers."
And, you know, it just mostly was that,
because, growing up with my family,
you know, it was magic all the time,
you know, it was incredible.
But at the same time, we also were raised
by my father as he was going through his own process.
You know, when my father,
had his accident,
the one he writes in his book about,
I was about three years old.
Can you tell us about the accident,
for people who haven't read the book?
My father suffered an accident,
when he was in college,
he was driving back home,
and he had,
one would call it an out-of-body experience,
or something of the sort.
He remembers, as before he crashed,
he lifted himself out,
he left his body,
he took his friends out of the car,
and he was still in the car.
You know, they took him to the hospital,
he was almost dying,
but he remembered the experience,
he had no idea how to even explain this,
you know, because he was a medical student,
he was a medical doctor.
That kind of belief
doesn't really go well with this.
So,
he began to
doing this
search for himself and that kind of thing,
what's the answer to this, so,
he went to my grandma, you know,
and he told her what had done,
and she says,
"Well you've got to start training with me."
So,
he began to go
to her sessions every Sunday,
and they would go with something they called dreaming.
And, for three years, every Sunday, they go and meditate
from seven or eight o'clock in the morning
to about three o'clock in the afternoon,
every, for three years.
So, when I was a child,
I grew up during that process.
So for me, I remember
a before and after dad of that.
The way he taught me in the before
he began his transition period,
and then once he came out,
and he was not Don Miguel Ruiz,
you know, (mumbles).
And I was, around my age of
11 or 12 years old.
When he completed the process?
Yeah, when he,
when he started to teach
in the way we know him now.
Yes.
And, I was 11 or 12 years old,
he used to pay me to go to his classes.
(laughs)
You know, wanting me to teach him,
and like, he was wanting me to get involved,
and I was 11 or 12 years old,
I was really into my school,
I was really, I was in sixth grade,
and really, going into my teenage years,
so my dad taught me and I really enjoyed it,
and at the same time I wanted to be part of my friends,
and it was this back and forth
between that.
And, I still went,
I still went to the Teotihuacan,
I still did it but,
having learned all these things,
I also learned how to get out of it.
You know, I used my own word,
and you know, the way to justify my own,
judge my own victim, my own parasite,
I knew how to get into that,
and say, "I don't need to do this.
"I will just go through the motions."
And, that was fine, but,
even though I still go to the classes,
even though I still went to the weekend reatreats
and workshops my dad held,
even though my dad wound up,
he would try and teach me
what we call silent knowledge.
Silent knowledge is basically teaching
and, it's like,
if I wanted to learn how to swim,
he'd just push me into the pool,
and if I didn't know, you have to learn.
And that's how I learned how to swim.
That's how
lots of my family
taught us.
Now, my dad gave me a rule,
and says, "Okay, you can do all you want,
"but when you finish college,
"when you no longer have to function
"the way you have to function in school,
"I will push you very, very hard.
"And until then, you will translate for your grandma,"
who my grandma couldn't speak a word of English.
So she used to, she was a curandera,
a faith healer, and in her healing sessions,
I would translate her prayers,
her interactions with her people who came to see her,
and I did that for,
since from the age of 13, until about
24 or 25.
So you were absorbing a lot of
knowledge, both directly,
and subliminally from your grandmother
at that time, as well.
Exactly.
And let's talk a little bit about this,
you were saying, "My life,
"and our family was magical."
Let's talk about
the Toltec way and your family,
and why, what is it about your life that was magical?
Well magical, in a sense that,
imagine living in a family that doesn't have the same rules
as all your friends.
Imagine growing up in a family where,
I would go and pick up my dad,
and my dad would say,
"All right, are you gonna tell me,
"or should I tell you?"
Something I did when he was away,
one time I actually decided to test him,
and I says, "Okay tell me."
"Well, you did this, this, and that."
"How did you know?"
(laughs)
So, growing up in a place
where you couldn't get away with much, you know,
he knew, and my grandma knew.
Also, with my grandma,
growing up with her beliefs,
with her, like,
she would interact with spirits,
she would interact with, you know,
she would do cleansings, she would do exorcisms,
she would do
all of these wonderful miracles, you know,
people would be very, very sick
and then all of the sudden,
they got cured.
She cured a person who had cancer.
You know, she,
there was a person who was bed-ridden,
and she would go and do her prayers,
do her healings,
and the person, from
being quadriplegic, to being in a wheelchair,
from being in the wheelchair to standing.
And then watching the interaction between
my grandma and my dad,
sometimes it'd be interesting.
You know sometimes,
you walk in to a conversation,
and there was no one around,
but, you know my grandma was,
had something in her system,
like, it was more like,
a different being.
Like, you know when you do a meditation
and all of the sudden you start talking
in a different person, completely.
And my dad would be talking to her,
and it would be an interesting interaction.
And then all of the sudden,
you know, also the people who
came in to see my grandma were very interesting.
Like Angel Debbie, I met her.
City Gyaan, all of these people
who just came into our lives,
you know, yogis and Buddhists who came into,
you know there was actually Buddhists
who wanted to take me to their temple and my dad said no.
And, it's interesting.
It was a magical life.
It was magical,
and it was one of the things that,
you know, for the longest time it was really hard
to separate between my high school friends
and my junior high school friends,
and my life.
You know, Jose
did something very similar.
Jose, your brother.
My brother, Don Jose.
Don Jose
was in his own rebellion as well.
And, one time he,
my dad sent them to India,
and when my brother came back from India,
you know, he began to do,
people would ask him to talk,
and he'd start talking, he'd be in parties.
You know, one time, like,
someone was
throwing a teenage party and someone was very, very drunk,
and asked my brother,
"Hey, teach us something you've learned in India."
And he says, "Okay,
"I'll teach you this mantra this yogi taught me."
So he sang to a bunch of,
a group of people, and they're all heavy metal guys,
so they're very long hair
and have tattoos and piercings.
And, you know,
my brother started doing his chant,
something very similar and they,
I don't remember it.
But, these people who've never meditated
in their life,
never sat in the lotus position,
never could stand still for more than ten minutes,
did it for 45 minutes.
There he was, my brother chanting away,
everyone all of the sudden,
once they knew the words, they began to chant,
and they began to do that.
And at the end of it,
that friend who was really drunk
who had instigated this,
says, "Jose, what have you done?
"I'm no longer drunk!
"What did you do to me?"
And he says, "I didn't do anything,
"we just did this."
That's wonderful.
So now, my brother does that now,
it's like I see my brothers doing what magic
my dad did.
And the most powerful thing I ever seen my dad do,
was, he was in
Peru,
in the Inca, in the Machu Picchu,
and he says, "Do you want me to see me
"bring the fog?"
And all of the sudden,
he says, "It'll be,
"in a few minutes, you won't be able to see your nose."
In a few minutes the fog came,
and it was completely surrounding Machu Picchu.
And my dad says, "Do you want to see it
"disappear and be a clear sky?"
In a few minutes the fog passed,
beautiful, clear sky.
So, who are the Toltec?
What is the Toltec way?
The Toltec,
in our family, in our tradition,
because the way our family teaches us
is passed from generation after generation.
So by our family's definition,
a Toltec is an artist.
A Toltec existed with the Aztecs,
with the Olmecs,
with everyone,
every civilization had Toltecs.
And they're just called artists.
But not art in the usual sense.
Art in the usual sense, yes.
But beyond?
Yes.
Basically the whole,
the art was our art,
life was our art.
Our Toltecs are the military,
our Toltec were the priest.
Toltec were everyone
who began to learn.
That's how we know it in our tradition.
And,
in archaeology,
you can say that there's a civilization
that existed in Tula, in Teotihuacan,
that the Toltec were here.
But according to our traditions,
and based on our traditions,
it comes from the word, "artist."
So, whether or not like that's,
that's how we know it.
But it's living life with a higher
level of artistry, of creating one's own life.
Yes.
It, in order to be a Toltec,
first thing you have to do is learn
the mastery of awareness,
to be aware, one that we are dreaming,
but also be aware of our word,
of our actions, of why we do this, why.
Once we are aware,
we do the mastery of transformation,
which is changing our dream,
changing our lifestyle,
changing so that
we create the last mastery, which is the mastery of love,
which is to being in love, 24/7, all the time,
a whole life is love.
Even as a warrior,
even as a priest,
even as the architect,
even as anything we desire to be,
and that's how our family,
we know what a Toltec is, an artist.
Our whole life is a white canvas.
We can erase it, recreate it,
and there's something in our canvas that we do not like,
we erase it,
and we start anew.
You don't carry it,
you don't beat yourself up,
let's talk about
some of the exercises, you mentioned one today,
that your father used to have you and your brother do,
which was to imagine yourself,
running with your eyes closed
in a meditation, running, just running,
completely focused,
for hours at a time.
Most people can't do that for one minute at a time.
No, well,
that started when my grandma taught him,
my dad that.
Imagine having that exercise
for every Sunday,
every day, from eight o'clock in the morning,
until about three o'clock,
or seven o'clock,
depending on the day.
The same exercise?
Yeah, sometimes.
She would have him do that for--
Or something very similar, you know,
but the whole point of it
is that, you learn, one,
what discipline is.
Because our attention is everywhere,
you know, just like a child,
our attention, we're hooked,
by everything, constantly.
And if you ever close your eyes,
and just be still,
and you try to do a chant,
like an om,
it takes a while for our whole attention to get into the om,
that's the whole purpose of an om.
When we go into that om,
it hooks our attention, it just puts it right there.
It makes it so easy.
So when the exercise,
when we do the running on the beach,
it's the equivalent of an om,
but it's harder, because one, you're not chanting,
one, you're not making a physical exercise,
it's all in our mind, in our imagination.
You can't move a muscle, you can't scratch your nose.
And you have to do it.
And what was the purpose of this exercise,
in terms of gaining that mental power, or will,
the ability to use your will over your mind?
The power of the will,
we can say our will is our word,
our will is what manifests life,
what we do, when we do it,
action, reaction.
That is the force by which we create.
If our will is strong, we can stay focused,
we can manifest anything,
if it's not strong, if our will's not strong,
we'll be tempted to give into
our, "I'll do it later,"
or, I remember doing this,
I'll scratch my nose and,
anything that keeps us away from what we have to do.
And in this sense, our,
what we wanted to do is learn
to have that discipline to transform.
To be able
to have the discipline
to transform that white canvas,
and create our art.
Because it's so easy to give into
the temptation of our judgement.
It's so easy to give into temptation of our,
our victim, our parasite.
It's very easy to give in to our hate,
to our envy, to our judgements, to our
jealousy, to any, to our insecurities,
or any of the stories that goes against us.
It's the easiest thing.
The easiest thing in a romance,
in a relationship with romance,
is to go negative, to go into our wound,
to judge, to victimize,
to be very negative.
It's only, and it's easy
because that's the way we learned it.
And you talk about this a great deal,
about how we learn.
And this is important to that,
because we start learning through words.
We start as a blank canvas.
Yes.
In essence, I mean depending on if you
talk about what your bring from another lifetime,
or whatnot but essentially as a baby,
we are a relatively blank canvas.
Exactly.
You have to learn to have those wounds
before you can have that judgement of the person
that you're involved with in a love affair, for example,
right?
Yes, we have to be domesticated.
Yes.
In other words,
you can say,
you need to learn how to function
in this society, in this dream.
You know, but,
each one of us grows up in a family
with a set belief system with set rules,
and we are domesticated to that.
Then, we learn to function
in the society our family lives in,
you know, the community,
and we learn to live in that community.
And, when we learn that community,
we being to function and be
either productive in that community, or not be productive.
You know, the community itself has its rules.
The family has its rules.
So in order to function with them,
we need to know those rules.
Language is one of them.
Without language, there's no
form of communicating between you and I.
If not language,
I would make gestures to you,
and hopefully you would understand what I'm trying to say,
you know?
And at the same time,
it's the very thing that divides us.
Exactly.
Because we each have
very different understandings of
any and all words.
Yet at the same time,
our biggest mistake is
believing that everyone else believes
the same thing we believe.
Right, right.
You know, it's,
we domesticate ourselves,
we grow up in a society, and we believe.
And the reason why we believe is because we love.
Why would I doubt my dad?
Why would I doubt my mom?
Why would I doubt my family?
Why would I doubt my priest or my preacher,
or my,
whatever term it is.
Our teachers,
our president,
why would I doubt them?
You know, when we're children,
we're innocent,
and we're innocent because we believe
anything the people we love say.
Yet your father taught you
some basic rules you lived by,
which was, one was,
don't believe me.
Mhmm, which is the easy one.
But learn to listen.
Don't believe yourself.
Which was very difficult.
But learn to listen.
Don't believe anyone else,
but learn to listen.
What did that mean in your life?
Don't believe the words of others,
even yourself, but learn to listen?
To be skeptical,
is to really
be aware
that every one is talking from their point of view.
It has nothing to do with me,
even someone who loves me,
their love has nothing to do with me,
absolutely nothing.
They love me, because they see something about,
in me that they love about themselves.
And that's actually something very fearful
for some of us who
doesn't understand that.
You know, it's just like,
what do you mean?
That means you're not loving me for who I am?
That fear comes up, it's like, wait a minute,
I thought it was about me.
I thought...
And that's what the natural reaction is,
when we put our personal importance,
when we put our love outside of ourselves.
We always think that someone's gonna take it away.
And because we have a fear that someone's gonna take it away
we cling to it.
And the problem is,
that we make the mistake of not realizing
that the only person taking that away is me.
Because when someone leaves us,
when someone, when we have a break-up,
when someone breaks up with us,
it is me who's taking the love away,
not that person.
Yet it looks like it because
that person was validating something about me.
Yes, and this gets into
a big fear that most human beings have,
which in the Toltec way,
you address from a very early age, which is,
we come into the world alone,
we experience life, essentially alone,
and die alone, it doesn't mean
that we don't have parallel characters,
we're having our experiences with,
but what is the essential difference,
for you personally, in having been raised this way,
to understand this is your journey,
you're alone,
what did that mean for you?
The first time I realized this,
it meant a lot of fear.
It was,
I would say the most,
the most fear I've ever had,
to realize that I was alone.
And when I realized that,
I realized that
all my fears in relationships,
all my fears
in the way I handle myself,
in the projection of who I am,
even the persona that I created,
was all based on fear.
Everything I did
was for the fear of not being accepted.
And acceptance, the reward of being accepted
is that I won't be alone,
I have company.
There'll be people around me.
It's just like when we were growing up,
when were taught
with reward and punishment.
I did something right, "Yay!"
I did something wrong, "No, try again."
You know, we never stop doing that.
I never stopped doing that.
How did you,
what did you do with the knowledge you have,
to begin taking this notion on-board and accepting it,
and where did it take you?
Well when I realized this,
you can say,
it was the first time I picked up
the book of "The Four Agreements" for the very first time,
under this point of view.
And when you read it,
what was different when you read it this time?
Which, I think this is one of the most essential books
for every human being,
that's ever been written.
You see, before this moment in time,
that book was my dad talking to me.
And like any child,
dad's talking to me,
it's my dad telling me what to do.
And after that moment,
I saw it for the work of art that it is.
Because all of the sudden,
in realizing my fears,
in realizing
that I wasn't authentic with myself,
I was completely vulnerable.
You can say,
it was the most naked I ever was.
And it was the moment where
anyone could see me.
And I used everything
to shield me from it.
My disguise,
my personal importance, the way I dressed,
the music I listened to.
Because even, I even listened to music
not because I liked it, but because it was acceptable.
Right.
And when I relaized
that I was doing this to myself,
well, I had one choice.
Well, two.
I continue being like this,
or I can say, "Stop,
"I want to change."
And as we can say,
when that moment happened,
it came from that moment where
the hurt, the heartbreak was so tough,
and the heartbreak was not,
you know, the catalyst might have been a breakup,
or a song,
but the end result was the truth.
And just like a great teacher
many, many years ago says,
"The truth will set you free."
Well, I was alone.
Isn't that wonderful?
All of the sudden, I realized
that there is no such thing as the one,
but if there is, that one is me.
Because from the moment I am born,
to the moment I die,
I am with me.
So the best relationship I'll ever have
is the one with me.
And how wonderful it is that I'm alone,
because whenever someone comes up to me,
I get to share that with them.
I get to share that love,
and all of the sudden,
it doesn't matter whether or not they say yes or no,
it doesn't matter if they accept me,
it doesn't matter if they reject me,
it doesn't matter.
If I say I love you and says,
"Oh, get lost creep."
Well, thanks.
Bye, thank you so much.
That's a big part of it,
not taking things personally,
which, of course, is part of the four agreements,
but this is embodied in what you're talking about.
You see,
that's the whole point.
Before that moment I realized that,
I really thought that everything was because of me.
People behave badly because of me.
Or they rejected or accepted,
and, to a certain degree, you can say, "Yeah,"
from a point of view, "yeah they didn't like you,
"they didn't accept this way, they don't,"
and all of the sudden realize,
"Yes, that is the truth."
But, it's all based on their belief system.
They're rejecting me from their point of view,
they're rejecting me from that,
they're accepting me from that.
Yet for me,
I realized that
I was the one whose opinion mattered the most.
Yes.
And just having that love, it was just easy.
After that, learning,
you can say that's when I really began to teach
and learn again from my father, from my grandma,
from every one of those people.
Once you were set free.
Once I
began to listen to them.
Yes.
Because before that,
it was my dad talking, it was my grandma talking,
it was my dad's apprentices talking to me,
because my dad's apprentices taught me,
Gini Gentry taught me,
Barbara Emrys, now,
used to be Miller, now it's Emrys,
Gary van Warmerdam taught me.
Allan Hardman taught me.
Don Jose Ruiz taught me.
My brother, Jose Leo taught me,
and now my wife and my children are teaching me.
Yes.
And whenever I go and teach,
and do a class,
the class is teaching me.
I'm saying what I know,
but it's the class that's teaching me.
So when you're empty in this way,
when you've learned to get,
in essence, past yourself,
into this place of
you creating your own canvas,
alone and your journey,
not alone,
and not lonely, but singular,
in your own journey,
it really does make it possible to
see and listen
in a whole new way, doesn't it?
Yeah.
It allows you to listen.
Because you're not trying to protect
who you are and what you are,
the story of who you are,
that's gone, right?
Yeah.
And I think,
and that's
a very key, important thing.
Because,
just like my dad's agreement,
always do your best,
there are days when you'll be able to do your best,
and there are days when your best is very little.
And same thing with that you described,
there are days when the temptation
to take it personal will be strong.
There are days when my ego will be talking.
There are days when my impatience is ready.
And the important thing,
the difference between
now and then,
is that then, I would judge myself
for those actions,
now, whenever those happens, I accept it.
That's the way it is.
I am that way.
I am impatient.
I am judgmental.
I am,
and there are days when I am not.
That's the difference, because
when you have forgiveness,
when you allow yourself to go through life
there are days when the,
when life puts you all the way down,
and there are days when life puts you all the way up,
and until the day I die,
I'm 32 years old now,
until the day I die,
there will be days where I'm gonna be very tempted
and there'll be days when I'm not tempted at all.
And that's the beauty of it.
You know, I remember once telling
a teacher, or a student,
or someone who went to one of the power journeys,
and he made a great realization,
and I says, "Great.
"Now you get to reconstruct it and do it again."
He says, "What do you mean?"
"Well you have to go back, and re-do it.
"You have to recreate the dream,
"you have to recreate the belief system,
"you have to recreate it."
And he says, "Why?"
"Well you have to function in the world."
"No! I succeeded!"
The thing about it son,
is that you succeeded now,
but you have to do it again and again.
You see, it's easy here in Teotihuacan,
but when you go back to your world--
Cincinnati.
It's going to be difficult,
because everyone remembers you the way you were,
and everyone's expecting you to behave
the way you behaved.
And when you change, and you try to express that,
they won't believe you.
And they don't want you to be
any different than they know you.
No,
but here's the most important part,
you'll remember this moment,
and when you go back home,
you'll say, "I used to be,
"I was like this, I reached nirvana,
"I reached this high level of spiritual knowledge.
"I was able to reach that."
And we think, just by remembering it,
it'll be automatic now,
it'll always be the same,
you won't have to put any work.
That's the same mistake I made when I was a little kid.
I am my father's son.
It's easy, I don't have to do
what the rest of these people are doing.
Wrong!
(laughs)
I have to do it, too.
Just like he had to do it.
Yeah.
And we do it over again.
And even if you accomplished
a certain level of understanding,
well, tomorrow's gonna be the next day,
and we might forget,
so we have to do it over again, and over again,
to the point where it's easy.
Right, and this is the thing,
the diligence, and I think that,
in each of the books,
that's one of the messages I find that comes
through very clearly.
Like you say, you can't assume
that it's just going to be automatic
because you feel it once.
This whole notion
of using your will and repetition,
and practicing,
that is the journey,
on everything, it's just like mastering
any other art in life,
to master the emotions, maybe even more so.
Exactly.
It's like, like Chopra said in his book,
"Seven Spiritual Laws of Success,"
you do it for a little bit,
you know, for the next two hours I will
practice being
impeccable with my word.
For the next three hours,
I'll practice being,
not taking things personal.
For the next day I'll practice
abundance, happiness.
And little by little, for more you more,
the greater you'll become.
You know, like my dad says,
"Practice makes the master."
Yes, and you were saying,
oh I'm sorry go ahead.
Oh, go for it.
No, go ahead.
No, it's okay.
(laughs)
You were saying earlier,
and in fact you talked about this in your class earlier,
that you're the one you're waiting for,
it's not anybody externally,
in terms of everyone waiting for
the big love, the big whatever.
But actually,
we're the ones
that we're waiting for
and need to integrate with,
and so the notion of
judging ourselves very harshly,
or self-hatred takes on
a much more dynamic meaning.
It's going against yourself,
it's a sin.
Yes.
From that point of view.
And yet most people judge themselves very harshly.
How did, what did you learn
along your journey about this,
judging oneself harshly?
Well, when we judge ourself harshly it's because,
we have a belief system.
We have points of views,
we have a book of law.
And by this book of law we judge others,
we judge what's acceptable, what's not acceptable,
what's cool, what's uncool,
what's hip, what's not hip,
what's appropriate, what is not appropriate,
what's good Christian, what's not good Christian,
what's good Muslim, what's not good Muslim,
what's good Christian, but not good Buddhist,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera,
we create a belief system about ourselves.
You see, all the information we've ever learned,
we use it on ourselves,
both the positive and the negative.
You know,
we create the persona that is me.
I created Miguel Ruiz Jr.
He is my creation.
And, before,
my creation came with a lot of judgement,
and a lot of victim and a lot of yes,
I'm doing something right when I'm following the rules,
when I'm doing something that I don't agree with,
I'm going to judge myself.
When I'm dressed the way I shouldn't be dressed,
I'm going to criticize myself.
I did it,
if I put my attention
and my personal importance on how many women
I can attract,
and I didn't get that woman
to be attracted by me,
I'm going to judge myself really hard.
If I really put my importance in that,
then I mold myself to that,
"Okay, if I want to attract women,
"I have to be this, this, this, and that,
"and shift here, shift there, do this, do that."
And, if I don't do it,
well, I'm the stupid one.
And I can be really harsh on myself.
The minute
you no longer base your personal importance
on whether or not I'm attractive to a woman,
and who cares if I'm attractive,
everything shifts.
Everything shifts.
When you're not looking
for that external approval?
Exactly.
But that external approval,
I'm actually using that approval to validate me.
Right.
You see, I use,
I can use peoples' words,
to go against or in my favor.
And most often than not,
whenever someone,
if someone were to call me stupid,
and I believed them,
I'm using their words against me.
Even though it sounds like that person's saying it to me.
You have to buy it.
I have to buy it.
And if I don't buy it, I don't buy it,
nothing happens, you know.
If this person,
who I don't really consider is that important to me
calls me stupid,
it doesn't even matter anything.
But if it's someone who I really care for,
and calls me stupid, then it's gonna be.
So it's an interesting paradigm in that sense.
Yes.
But,
it comes to the point where,
when I changed my beliefs about myself,
I will change my belief system,
what's acceptable and what's not acceptable,
and all of the sudden,
re-direct that focus.
Everything changes.
Even if,
even if I'm not taking this path,
of the Toltec path,
even if I'm
shifting,
we're always changing.
Our direction, our focus, our belief
always changes.
Now it's maybe not for women,
now it's maybe for political movement.
If it's not for political movement,
it's for a religious movement,
if it's not a religious movement it's for fashion,
for fashion for music,
and so on and so forth it can never stop.
It's infinite.
But in the end if you learn to satisfy yourself
and say yes,
and just really learn to enjoy.
It's your life.
Just to enjoy.
Then everything is perfect.
Now, you have little children yourself.
Yes.
And so,
how are you, in some ways,
repeating what your father brought to your life?
(laughs)
Well first, I have to domesticate.
I, some years ago,
someone was asking me,
"Why don't we domesticate our children?"
And I said, "Of course we do.
"Of course we have to.
"Otherwise they won't be able to function in this world."
When you say domesticate,
you mean teach them
the normal sorts of things
in the normal sorts of ways?
The thing that's like, whether we want to or not,
we will domesticate our child.
Even if we say we are not going to domesticate them,
we are domesticating them,
because we're teaching them a belief system.
Right.
And the belief system is not to domesticate them,
okay.
So they're gonna domesticate them in different ways.
Because, as a child,
children get
their attentions will always
be hooked by everything they see.
If it's not gonna be me,
it's going to be someone else,
but they will learn.
Because they're here to learn,
and they're learning.
Of course.
But are you bringing through some of the
family magic for your children?
Of course.
Well you know, it's one of those things that,
I can't predict the future,
but I do know that,
you know, the way I learned,
the way I lived my childhood
could never be recreated.
It's special for those years,
where my grandma was around,
and my dad was around.
When my children grow up,
I have no idea how long my dad will be around,
and whether he'll see me or Jose
as often as I saw my parents,
but I will enjoy him as much as I can.
What's the most important thing you feel,
as a parent,
that you can pass onto your children now?
My love.
Absolutely my love.
And, learning to be authentic.
But the problem in this,
is that once they reach
that stage where they want to be accepted,
not by me or my wife,
but by their peers,
it'll be interesting.
And,
that's when I have to learn to let go,
like any parent.
They have to learn to let go,
of course,
I have to be ready,
of course there has to be rules in the home,
of course they have to follow
a guideline.
But outside of that,
I have to learn
that they are going to learn
from their friends.
And the only thing I
want to do,
is to teach them to learn,
don't believe me,
don't believe yourself,
and don't believe them,
but learn to listen.
If I can get that,
that would be great.
But, like any dance,
it takes two to tango.
And so it requires my son
to believe, or to listen.
Or you can say,
to be willing.
And my daughter, too, of course.
And that's gonna be interesting,
because she's the first girl in my family for a long time.
(laughs)
I'm sure she's going to have
a very special life and on that note,
thank you so much for taking the time,
I know that you, your
voice was already a little bit hoarse
from having taught this afternoon,
and I appreciate the time that you've given us.
Oh no worries, I'm,
I'm very thankful for this opportunity.
Well, people were very affected by you,
you have a very beautiful countenance and,
it's born out of the fact you've actually been living this,
these aren't just words,
it's not just your father's work,
you and your father teach together now.
Yes.
And you're carrying the knowledge forward.
You are this generation,
and I'm sure your little girl and boy
will be doing the same work.
Thank you, thank you.
And my brother, Jose,
my brother, Leo, and myself
will do our best this little girl and this little boy.
Carry this forward,
in the family together.
Yeah.
Because it's not gonna end.
(soft music)
For more of the Ruiz family's work,
go to their website at MiguelRuiz.com,
and find a list of the classes being taught
by the elder and younger men,
as well as journey's to Mexico's Toltec site,
and Ruiz Sr.'s books.
Until next time,
thank you for watching CMN.
(soft music)